---
title : "FPGA-Driven VGA Screen to Print Whatever You Like :)  "
date : 2025-07-21 11:28:00 +0530
categories : blog
tags : FPGA
author: <ayush>
math : true
---

# The Broad Idea

Armed with a Basys3 FPGA board and a monitor that supported VGA (don't think these are common anymore), we put together a little setup that takes in display information and gives an output of the drawing of your choice on the said monitor. 

We'll take you through the hardware set-up, the code and other nuances so that you can either recreate it for your purposes or (hopefully) take it forward :)

## Display Controller

The system relies on a verilog module programmed onto the FPGA which provides a color output, alongside horizontal and vertical sync signals. If you are new to the VGA protocol, [this is a fairly informative guide](https://embeddedthoughts.com/2016/07/29/driving-a-vga-monitor-using-an-fpga/).

We used a controller module quite similar to the one described in the article.

 `h_count` and `v_count` are registers that hold the value of which pixel our controller is currently positioned at. `H_TOTAL` and `V_TOTAL` refer to the maximum number of pixels to be traversed the respective direction (will depend on screen resolution).
 
  The logic below shows how we increment the registers, performing the action of moving across the screen.


```verilog
always @(posedge clk_25MHz or posedge reset) begin
    if (reset) begin
        h_count <= 0;
        v_count <= 0;
    end else begin
    if (h_count == H_TOTAL- 1) begin
        h_count <= 0;
        if (v_count == V_TOTAL- 1)
         v_count <= 0;
    else
    v_count <= v_count + 1;
    end 
    else 
    h_count <= h_count + 1;
 end
 ```
> There isn't actually anything 'moving' across the screen, it is simply to meet timing requirements as we are emulating a CRT. Look into VGA protocol and emulation of it for a better understanding 
{: .prompt-tip }



The below code will generate the sync signals (active low). `H_FP`and `V_FP` refer to the porch pixels, and the `H_ACTIVE` and `V_ACTIVE` parameters denote the actual display pixels of the monitor in either direction.

```verilog
assign hsync = ~((h_count >= (H_ACTIVE + H_FP)) && (h_count < (H_ACTIVE + H_FP + H_SYNC)));
assign vsync = ~((v_count >= (V_ACTIVE + V_FP)) && (v_count < (V_ACTIVE + V_FP + V_SYNC)));
assign active_area = (h_count < H_ACTIVE) && (v_count < V_ACTIVE);
```

## Hardware initializations on the FPGA

Utlising some nifty features on Xilinx Vivado, we will be setting up some **block RAM (BRAM)** that will store the coordinates of the pixels that need to be lit up on the monitor. 

For example (taking the top left corner of the screen as (0,0)), if you want the centre pixel of your 640x480 screen to glow, you need to provide (320,240) as a coordinate to the RAM. 



The Microblaze soft processor reads the coordinates from the two BRAMs (one for the x-coordinate and the other for the y) and runs some processing on it, which we will now discuss.


>  The coordinates are being passed to the BRAM as a `.coe` file. 
{: .prompt-tip }

## What is this processing you speak of?

Utlising *Vitis IDE*, we will have Microblaze run some C code to convert the coordinates to a **pixel map**.

A pixel map is a term we use for a piece of memory that has its bits correspond to a pixel on the monitor. If the fourth bit in the memory is *ON*, the corresponding pixel on the screen is lit up. Similarly for all other bits and pixels.

```c
    X_in = Xil_In32( XPAR_X_COORDS_CTRL_S_AXI_BASEADDR);
    Y_in = Xil_In32(XPAR_Y_COORDS_CTRL_S_AXI_BASEADDR);
```

The soft processor reads the first coordinate from the base addresses of the BRAMs, by reading in 32 bits from the memory (an integer is stored as 32 bits).


Now things get juicy, we need some imagination for this. 

Think of a 640x480 screen as 480 vertically arranged strips consisting of 20 horizontal groups of 32 bits each. We will refer to these groups henceforth as **packets**. For every coordinate that is read from the BRAM, we need to know which packet's pixel the coordinate refers to. 

```c
div = X_in/32;
packet_no = (Y_in*20) + div;	
```
If the coordinate is $(73,0)$, then we find that it belongs to packet number 2 (the first packet is packet 0)

$$ packet = 73/32 + 0*20 ~= 2.28 ~= 2  (truncated)$$

Each packet consists of 32 pixels. A coordinate corresponds to a particular pixel, hence a particular bit in the packet. We must further *calculate* the location of the bit within the packet as well. 

```c
bit_location = X_in % 32 ;
```

In our example, 

$$ BitLocation = 73 \, \%  \, 32 ~= 9 $$

the coordinate corresponds to the bit at index location 9 (the first bit is location 0) in packet number 2.

> The reason we're dealing with 32 bit packets instead of simply interacting with a single bit at a time is because we couldn't figure out how :/ if you're able to work past that, do write back and let us know.
{: .prompt-info}

Once we locate which bit the coordinate corresponds to, we need to make it *ON*. Since we can a minimum send 32 bits at a time, we need to know the *ON/OFF* states of all the bits in the packet before we send it out. 

## Why do i need to know the state of all the bits?
for $(73,0)$ we might set the 9th index of packet 2 as *ON* (rest of the bits in the packet as *OFF*) and send it out. Say, the next coordinate is $(75,0)$. This is the 11th index of packet (check if this makes sense to you). If i send this packet out now, with the 11th index *ON* and the rest *OFF*, i'll end up overwriting the bit that corresponds to $(73,0)$. That's a huge issue.

To solve for this, we utilise the below solution. 

```c
void IWillPrint(int HowManyPoints)		
{		

	X_in = Xil_In32(XPAR_X_COORDS_CTRL_S_AXI_BASEADDR + 4*offset);
	Y_in = Xil_In32(XPAR_Y_COORDS_CTRL_S_AXI_BASEADDR + 4*offset);

	for(int i = 0; i<HowManyPoints; i++)
	{

        div = X_in/32;
        packet_no = (Y_in*20) + div;	//packet size is 32bits because we have XilOut32 and not XilOut1
                                        //calculates the packet number for a particular pixel. The screen is divided into 20x480 packets


        if(prev_packet_no != packet_no)		//when we know that the next coord does not lie in the same packet we know that 
        {									//the packet is ready to be sent to the pixel_bram
            Xil_Out32(XPAR_PIX_CTRL_S_AXI_BASEADDR + (4*prev_packet_no), sum );
            sum = 0;
        }


        bit_location = X_in % 32;	//finds the bit location of the coord in the packet 

        sum = sum | (1<<bit_location); //shifts the bit to the desired location in the packet



        prev_packet_no = packet_no;

        X_in = Xil_In32(XPAR_X_COORDS_CTRL_S_AXI_BASEADDR + 4*i);		//takes in the next coord
        Y_in = Xil_In32(XPAR_Y_COORDS_CTRL_S_AXI_BASEADDR + 4*i);

    }

    Xil_Out32(XPAR_PIX_CTRL_S_AXI_BASEADDR + (4*prev_packet_no), sum );


}
```
The above is our entire printing function. Once the packet number and bit location are calculated, we must check if the packet number is the same as the one of the previous coordinate. If it is the same, we can't send the packet out yet, we will end up overwriting packets. We will only send the packet out if the packet is different.

The `sum` variable contains the *'number'* to be sent to the 32-bit packet. It is calculated by shifting *1* to the appropriate index and performing a bitwise **OR** operation with the previous value of `sum`.

This wraps up the printing operation :)

## Further Graphics Control?
### Erasing Printed Information

```c
if(prev_packet_no != packet_no)
{
	Xil_Out32(XPAR_PIX_CTRL_S_AXI_BASEADDR + (4*prev_packet_no), sum_remove );
	sum_remove = 0xFFFFFFFF;
}

sum_remove = sum_remove & (0<<bit_location);
```

Inverting `sum` to be initalized as **0xFFFFFFFF** and put *0* to the pixels that need to be removed will behave as an erase tool. (anti-printing basically)


### Motion of Printed Matter
This involves the combination of a few functions. In order to display vidually expected motion, we must first erase the presently printed material and then print it at it's new location. We then erase this newly printed matter and print it at another location and so on. This displays motion of graphics.

First, we'll erase the previously drawn material by calling a function that contains the erase functionality.

We now need to print the material in its new location.

```c
Y_in = Xil_In32(XPAR_Y_COORDS_CTRL_S_AXI_BASEADDR + 4*offset) - step; 

    for(int i = 1; i<HowManyPoints+1; i++)
    {
        ...
```
You will notice that as we are taking in the Y-coordinate from the memory, we are subtracting its value by a `step`. This shifts the coordinate *up* by `step` number of pixels. You can experiment with motion along the x-axis as well.

```c
void moveUp(int HowManyPoints, int shift)
{
	for(int i = 0; i<shift ; i++) // shift will decide how much the pixels will move 
	{

		printShiftedY(100, i); // shifts 100 pixels up with a step of i
		removeSymbol(100); // erases 100 pixels, coordinates of which are stored in the BRAM

	}
}
```

This is the function that needs to be called in order to display motion (up).

### Oscillation
This is very similar to the previous function. 

```c
void oscillate(int HowManyPoints, int shift)
{

	while(1)
	{
	for(int i = 0; i<shift ; i++)
	{

		printShiftedY(HowManyPoints, i);
		removeShiftedY(HowManyPoints, i);

	}

	for(int j = shift - 2 ; j>=0; j--)
	{
		printShiftedY(HowManyPoints, j);
		removeShiftedY(HowManyPoints, j);
	}
	}
}
```

This brings about a continuous (`while(1)`) rocking motion in the printed material.

## Further Scope

One could absolutely be creating more display related motion functions than we did haha :) 






